tested in mice and are awaiting human trials that will be using gold nanoshells to help diagnose and treat cancer , and using liposomes as vaccine adjuvants and as vehicles for drug transport . Similarly , drug detoxification is also another application for nanomedicine which has shown promising results in rats . A benefit of using nanoscale for medical technologies is that smaller devices are less invasive and can possibly be implanted inside the body , plus biochemical reaction times are much shorter . These devices are faster and more sensitive than typical drug delivery . Advances in Lipid nanotechnology was also instrumental in engineering medical nanodevices and novel drug delivery systems as well as in developing sensing applications . # Drug delivery # Nanotechnology has provided the possibility of delivering drugs to specific cells using nanoparticles . The overall drug consumption and side-effects may be lowered significantly by depositing the active agent in the morbid region only and in no higher dose than needed . This highly selective approach would @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ found in dendrimers and nanoporous materials . Another example is to use block co-polymers , which form micelles for drug encapsulation . They could hold small drug molecules transporting them to the desired location . Another vision is based on small electromechanical systems ; nanoelectromechanical systems are being investigated for the active release of drugs . Some potentially important applications include cancer treatment with iron nanoparticles or gold shells . Targeted drug delivery is intended to reduce the side effects of drugs with concomitant decreases in consumption and treatment expenses . The increased efficiency of delivery results in overall societal benefit by reducing the amount of drug needed in an equipotent preparation of said therapy , and thus reduced cost to the consumer . Nanomedical approaches to drug delivery center on developing nanoscale particles or molecules to improve drug bioavailability . Bioavailability refers to the presence of drug molecules where they are needed in the body and where they will do the most good . Drug delivery focuses on maximizing bioavailability both at specific places in the body and over a period of time . This can potentially be achieved by @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ targeting the molecules and delivering drugs with cell precision . More than $65 billion are wasted each year due to poor bioavailability . ' ' In vivo ' ' imaging is another area where tools and devices are being developed . Using nanoparticle contrast agents , images such as ultrasound and MRI have a favorable distribution and improved contrast . The new methods of nanoengineered materials that are being developed might be effective in treating illnesses and diseases such as cancer . What nanoscientists will be able to achieve in the future is beyond current imagination . This might be accomplished by self assembled biocompatible nanodevices that will detect , evaluate , treat and report to the clinical doctor automatically . Drug delivery systems , lipid- or polymer-based nanoparticles , can be designed to improve the pharmacological and therapeutic properties of drugs . The strength of drug delivery systems is their ability to alter the pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of the drug . However , the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of nanomedicine is highly variable among different patients . When designed to avoid the body 's defence mechanisms , nanoparticles have beneficial properties @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ larger particles would have been cleared from the body , cells take up these nanoparticles because of their size . Complex drug delivery mechanisms are being developed , including the ability to get drugs through cell membranes and into cell cytoplasm . Efficiency is important because many diseases depend upon processes within the cell and can only be impeded by drugs that make their way into the cell . Triggered response is one way for drug molecules to be used more efficiently . Drugs are placed in the body and only activate on encountering a particular signal . For example , a drug with poor solubility will be replaced by a drug delivery system where both hydrophilic and hydrophobic environments exist , improving the solubility . Also , a drug may cause tissue damage , but with drug delivery , regulated drug release can eliminate the problem . If a drug is cleared too quickly from the body , this could force a patient to use high doses , but with drug delivery systems clearance can be reduced by altering the pharmacokinetics of the drug . Poor biodistribution is a problem @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the particulates from drug delivery systems lower the volume of distribution and reduce the effect on non-target tissue . Potential nanodrugs will work by very specific and well-understood mechanisms ; one of the major impacts of nanotechnology and nanoscience will be in leading development of completely new drugs with more useful behavior and less side effects . Polymeric nano-particles are a competing technology to lipidic ( based mainly on Phospholipids ) nano-particles . There is an additional risk of toxicity associated with polymers not widely studied or understood . This toxicity could include ( but not limited to ) hepatotoxicity , nephrotoxicity etc. and can have long term impacts not easily evaluated in short term in-vivo clinical trials either in animals or humans . Since the degradation of polymers to either their monomers or other degradation products in the body can not be accurately predicted ( unclear metabolic pathway ) , this is a real risk , specially in medicines intended for long term patient use . Even if the toxicity is ignored , there is additional hepatic load of metabolism , again an area of concern for long term medication @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ cost and predictable characterisation , so the formulation chemists prefer this . However , in the patient 's body this very stability ( slow degradation ) is a negative factor . Phospholipids on the other hand are membrane lipids ( already present in the body and surrounding each cell ) , have a GRAS ( Generally Recognised As Safe ) status from FDA and are derived from natural sources without any complex chemistry involved . They are not metabolised but rather absorbed by the body and the degradation products are themselves nutrients ( fats or micronutrients ) . It is greatly observed that nanoparticles are promising tools for the advancement of drug delivery , medical imaging , and as diagnostic sensors . However , the biodistribution of these nanoparticles is still imperfect due to the complex host 's reactions to nano- and microsized materials <sup> 14 </sup> and the difficulty in targeting specific organs in the body . Nevertheless , a lot of work is still ongoing to optimize and better understand the potential and limitations of nanoparticulate systems . For example , current research in the excretory systems of mice @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ organs based on their size and charge . These composites are encapsulated by a dendrimer and assigned a specific charge and size . Positively-charged gold nanoparticles were found to enter the kidneys while negatively-charged gold nanoparticles remained in the liver and spleen . It is suggested that the positive surface charge of the nanoparticle decreases the rate of opsonization of nanoparticles in the liver , thus affecting the excretory pathway . Even at a relatively small size of 5 nm , though , these particles can become compartmentalized in the peripheral tissues , and will therefore accumulate in the body over time . While advancement of research proves that targeting and distribution can be augmented by nanoparticles , the dangers of nanotoxicity become an important next step in further understanding of their medical uses . Nanoparticles are also used to circumvent multidrug resistance ( MDR ) mechanisms . Mechanisms of MDR include decreased uptake of drugs , reduced intracellular drug concentration by activation of the efflux transporters , modifications in cellular pathways by altering cell cycle checkpoints , increased metabolism of drugs , induced emergency response genes to impair apoptotic pathways @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ research studies# # *Abraxane , approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) to treat breast cancer , non-small- cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) and pancreatic cancer , is the nanoparticle albumin bound paclitaxel. *Doxil was originally approved by the FDA for the use on HIV-related Kaposi 's sarcoma . It is now being used to also treat ovarian cancer and multiple myeloma . The drug is encased in liposomes , which helps to extend the life of the drug that is being distributed . Liposomes are self-assembling , spherical , closed colloidal structures that are composed of lipid bilayers that surround an aqueous space . The liposomes also help to increase the functionality and it helps to decrease the damage that the drug does to the heart muscles specifically . *In a mice study , scientists from Rice University and University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center reported enhanced effectiveness and reduced toxicity of an existing treatment for head and neck cancer when using the nanoparticles to deliver the drug . The hydrophilic carbonic clusters functionalized with polyethylene glycol or PEG-HCC are mixed with the chemotherapeutic @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ receptor ( EGFR ) targeted Cetuximab and injected intravenously . They found the tumors were killed more effectively with radiation and the healthy tissue suffered less toxicity than without the nanotechnology drug delivery . The standard treatment contains Cremophor EL which allows the hydrophobic paclitaxel to be delivered intravenously . Replacing the toxic Cremophor with carbon nanoparticles eliminated its side effect and improved drug targeting which in turn required a lower dose of the toxic paclitaxel. *Researchers at Case Western Reserve University reported using nanoparticle chain to deliver doxorubicin to breast cancer cells in a mice study . Three magnetic , iron-oxide nanospheres were chemically linked to one doxorubicin-loaded liposome and formed a 100 nm long nanoparticle chain . After the nanochains penetrated the tumor , radiofrequency field was generated that caused the magnetic nanoparticles to vibrate and rupture the liposome , dispersing the drug in its free form throughout the tumor . The result showed that the nano treatment was more effective in halting tumor growth than the standard treatment with doxorubicin . It is also less harmful to healthy cells since only 5% to 10% of the standard dose @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ( PEG ) carrying payload of antibiotics at its core could swift charge thus allowing them to target bacterial infection more precisely inside the body , a group of MIT researchers reported . The nanoparticles , containing a sub-layer of pH sensitive chains of the amino acid histidine , carry a slightly negative charge when circulating in the blood stream , can evade detection and clearing by the immune system . When they encounter an infection site the particles gain a positive charge provoked by the slightly acidic environment at the infection sites , allowing them to bind to the negatively charged bacterial cell walls and release antibiotics at locally high concentration . This nano delivery system can potentially destroy bacteria even if it has developed resistance to antibiotics because of the targeted high dose and prolonged release of the drug . Although a lot of work is still needed , the researchers believe that it points to a new direction of using nanotechnology to treat infectious disease . *Using the biomimetic strategy , researchers in the Harvard University Wyss Institute demonstrated in a mouse model that the drug coated nanoparticles @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ regions in the blood vessels just like the platelets do . Aggregates of biodegradable nanoparticles coated with tissue plasminogen activator ( tPA ) , each about the size of a platelet , were injected intravenously . In the region of vessel narrowing , shear stresses dissociate the aggregates and release the tPA-coated nanoparticles which bind and degrade the blood clots . By prcised targeting and concentrating drug at the location of obstruction , the dose used is less than 1/50th of the normal dose . The nanotherapeutics will greatly reduce the severe side effect of bleeding , commonly found in standard treatment of thrombosis . *An early phase clinical trial using the platform of Minicell nanoparticle for drug delivery have been tested on patients with advanced and untreatable cancer . Built from the membranes of mutant bacteria , the minicells were loaded with paclitaxel and coated with cetuximab , antibodies that bind the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) which is often overexpressed in a number of cancers , as a ' homing ' device to the tumor cells . The tumor cells recognize the bacteria from which the minicells @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ engulf it . Once inside , the payload of anti-cancer drug kills the tumor cells . Measured at 400 nanometers , the minicell is bigger than synthetic particles developed for drug delivery . The researchers indicated that this larger size gives the minicells a better profile in side-effects because the minicells will preferentially leak out of the porous blood vessels around the tumor cells and do not reach the liver , digestive system and skin . This Phase 1 clinical trial demonstrated that this treatment is well tolerated by the patients . As a 